1. If your child disappears, get in touch with your immediate family, and those who within your / your child’s circle of friends. Contact your child’s school and any other related institution to see if they have any information that could be of use. If you learn that your spouse or ex-spouse is taking/planning to take/ in transit to another country with the child without your consent, you should take immediate action and follow the procedures outlined above.
2. Should the whereabouts of your child remain a mystery, report the disappearance to the authorities in your country and seek legal assistance.
3. In cases of cross-border abduction, it is advisable to engage a legal adviser specializing in this area of law and the Hague Convention who can advise you in the steps to be undertaken. This should be done in each of the countries concerned – yours and the one where the child has been taken. Provide your legal representatives in both countries with as much information as possible about the child and the second parent.
4. In the case of an abduction to POLAND, it is not always advisable to file a complaint against the other parent in the country from which the child was abducted as this may give the Polish court reasons to refuse return of the child.
5. It is advisable to contact other diplomatic institutions of the country where the other parent has gone (i.e. the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the consulate). This is possible only if you know where the other parent has gone with your child. Notify the official passport issuing offices in both countries.
